---
layout: paper
title: "riboviz 2: A flexible and robust ribosome profiling data analysis and visualization workflow"
year: "2021"
shortref: "Cope <i>et al.</i> <i>bioRxiv</i> 2021"
nickname: riboviz-2
journal: 
volume: 
issue: 
pages: 
authors: "Alexander L. Cope, Felicity Anderson, John Favate, Michael Jackson, Amanda Mok, Anna Kurowska, Emma MacKenzie, Vikram Shivakumar, Peter Tilton, Sophie M. Winterbourne, Siyin Xue, Kostas Kavoussanakis, Liana F. Lareau, Premal Shah, Edward W.J. Wallace"
image: /assets/images/papers/default-paper.svg
redirect_from: 
fulltext: 
pdflink: 
github: https://github.com/riboviz/riboviz
biorxiv: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.05.14.443910v1
pmid: 
pmcid: 
f1000: 
doi: "10.1101/2021.05.14.443910"
dryad_doi:
figshare_doi: 
altmetric_id: 106011183
category: paper
# Note: 'published' is a Jekyll keyword and does not refer to whether the paper is published, but rather to whether this Markdown should be part of the rendered site.
published: true
preprint: true
embargo: false	
peerreview: false
review: true
tags: [riboviz, bioinformatics, workflows]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

# Abstract 

**Motivation** Ribosome profiling, or Ribo-seq, is the state of the art method for quantifying protein synthesis in living cells. Computational analysis of Ribo-seq data remains challenging due to the complexity of the procedure, as well as variations introduced for specific organisms or specialized analyses. Many bioinformatic pipelines have been developed, but these pipelines have key limitations in terms of functionality or usability.

**Results** We present riboviz 2, an updated riboviz package, for the comprehensive transcript-centric analysis and visualization of Ribo-seq data. riboviz 2 includes an analysis workflow built on the Nextflow workflow management system, combining freely available software with custom code. The package is extensively documented and provides example configuration files for organisms spanning the domains of life. riboviz 2 is distinguished by clear separation of concerns between annotation and analysis: prior to a run, the user chooses a transcriptome in FASTA format, paired with annotation for the CDS locations in GFF3 format. The user is empowered to choose the relevant transcriptome for their biological question, or to run alternative analyses that address distinct questions. riboviz 2 has been extensively tested on various library preparation strategies, including multiplexed samples. riboviz 2 is flexible and uses open, documented file formats, allowing users to integrate new analyses with the pipeline.

**Availability** riboviz 2 is freely available at [github.com/riboviz/riboviz](https://github.com/riboviz/riboviz).
